And...
I came to A&M after World War II. I went down to North
Carolina State where I got my BS degree after the
war. And Dr. Lindsey had taught there before the
war, and they suggested that I might write him to
get into graduate school. So I wrote him in. Were
you, excuse me, were you from North Carolina?
Around Statesville, yes. See, I did, went to Mars
Hill Junior College. I got an A.B. there, a
Bachelor of Chemical Engineering from North
Carolina State in 1943. And then I was in the Navy
for four years. I worked for Burlington Mills for
one year. Then I decided I really wanted to go back
to graduate school. So then I went back down to
North Carolina State and talked with the
professors there. And I had missed Lindsey
because he had taught there while I was in the
service, I guess. I think just one year or so, one or
two years. He wasn't teaching there when I
finished in 43. And he wasn't there when I went back
after the war. He'd come out here. And so they
suggest I write him, and I wrote him, and he wanted
me to come out here to go to graduate school. So I
elected to come. And so I came out here then in 48,
spring of 48. as to do the work on the master's
degree. And then I got my master's here in 49 under
Bill Murdock, P.G. Murdock, who had come and got
hired sometime after the war. He'd been the shell
developer at Emeryville. And so I did both my
master's and my Ph.D. under him.
Well, in the first area, I worked under on my
master's degree. I did it on distillation,
and it was a mathematical description of
distillation columns using the finite
difference calculus. And then for my Ph.D., I
worked on chemical adsorption. I did a thesis on
that, or a dissertation. And I actually finished
it and got my degree in 1953. I started teaching for
the department in 1952. That's one of my GI bills
right now, so I needed some additional support.
And so I began teaching then in 1952, and then
finished up in 1953. And I started teaching in 1952
as an instructor. And then in 1949, I made Let's
see, I'm a full professor. In 1949, I got the
master's degree. In 53, I got the PhD. And then, I
guess it was about 59, I got the full professor. In
64, I was named head of the department.
You moved along fast. You moved along rapidly.
Well, there wasn't many people back then. There
wasn't much incentive to come to A&M to pay you a
support back in those days.
Do you remember, you were still under Lindsey. Do
you remember much about Lindsey and the
department when you first came into it? number of
people here, and the general thrust or character
of the department? Were they petroleum types, or
were they- what were we doing mostly? Well, at that
time, he was building a department, trying to
build a department at that time. Very difficult
for him because every time he got some, they'd go-
Moved on. Moved on. Jobs were good. He had G.L.
Fair, who'd been with Mobile during the war, and
A.M. Platt, both been with Mobile. They were
teaching. And Bob Andrews, who was in the service,
was one of the professors, and so was F.F. Bishop.
Yeah, I've heard a lot of people mention him. He was
with the department then. And he was a full
professor. And W.D. Harris was a full professor.
Yeah. I interviewed John there. Oh, you did?
Yesterday, yeah. He's been playing today. Yeah.
And so... But actually though, let's see, about
the time I got my Ph.D., Dr. Murdock quit and went
with Dow. And G.L. Fair quit about that time and
took a job as associate editor or assistant editor
or something, oil and gas journal. And A.M. Platt
went out to Hanford all about the same time. And
then Bill Murdock, my director, quit about the
time I got my degree and went to Dallas. And so, at
that time, that pretty little well left us with Dr.
Harris, Dr. Lindsay. Bishop died in 1955.
So we were down to Dr. Harris, Dr. Bishop, no I meant
Dr. Harris, Lindsay,
and I guess that was it. Bill Harris, was he around?
No, we pulled him in to help do some teaching. We
also got graduate students to help do some
teaching. We just didn't have the staff to do it.
So, we were trying to do a graduate program and try
to teach young grads, and it was just the salaries
they were paying back there. Actually, the V.S.
were doing as well, if not a little better. I
remember one of the persons went to work, and I
started teaching, got more than 90 of the Ph.D.
V.S. Yeah, I've heard someone else mention that
before. So, it was really hard to hire people back
then. So, we rocked along. Was sort of the thrust of
the department at that time keyed in for
petrochemical? Well, it really wasn't much
different.
It was to some extent, but not all that much. We were
one of the first ones to establish a portion in
chemical engineering kinetics analysis. This
was done, this was a good group of people, so they
had some of that. emphasis there, but it wasn't all
that much. How about with agriculture, with the
cotton, was it cotton research laboratory?
Cotton seed products, research laboratory, that
was kind of under, the doctor's worked over there
part of the time. But we were pretty well separated
from that at one time. I think they decided they
wanted to run it, the experiment station. So they
took it from- Probably Benson. No, it was before
that. So they kind of pulled it out from under
Lindsey and them. But Dr. Harry still worked over
there. Then I've forgotten a long time, somewhere
in that time, Bill Bill Harris came to help teach,
and Dr. Davis, he came also to assist in the
teaching, and we later hired both of those. I think
both of them were working on degrees, and so they
taught some while they were working on their
degrees.
And that was during the 50s. And then in 64, Dr.
Lindsay stepped down and said, Did Lindsey stay on
and teach for a while? Two or three years. I let him
stay as long as he wanted to. He was elected not to
teach any longer. I don't think he taught but a
couple of years. It wasn't very much. Well, you
really stepped into the headship at a prime time,
didn't you? Really, 64 should have been sort of the
beginning of the boom. Well, actually what
happened there, even at the beginning of what
happened then, It was John Connolly that was the
one that really did more for Texas Education than
anybody we've met. He got some salaries, and we got
30% increases there two or three years ago. I'm not
sure we've ever been much better off relatively
then than we ought to have since that time. And that
was all due to John Connolly, so that was when it
started moving. I came here in 69, and there was a
big There's lots of new people about that time,
from 64 through 69, really. Yeah, but there are not
too many people my age here. Or none of them now. But
I mean, all during my career, there weren't many.
Most of those went to industry. Yeah, right.
Engineering and alternatives were so
attractive. But never that way in history, I don't
think. We were grateful for anything. Well,
that's good to know, though, that Connolly, you
know, like... Oh, yeah, he was the one, and he made
all the difference in the world in Texas
education. Up until that time, they were all
saying, well, the legislature won't give us this,
the legislature won't give us that. But he got out
and convinced people that they needed to put some
money into education, and the legislature, and
they did, and that's when it started really going.
What about the, on the higher levels at A&M,
Gilchrist, Harrington, and Rudder? Well, you
see, when I came here, Dr. Bolton was executive
vice president, and Gilchrist was president, and
that made Gilchrist, I guess he was chancellor
then. Yeah, for a short time. Yeah, and then Bolton
was executive vice president. And then Tom
Harrington was teaching over, when I first came
here, he was teaching over at the base. That's
right, he was in charge of that NX program for a
while. He got a B.S. degree in Company Engineering
back in 21. But then they made Tom president, and
while he was president, I see Morgan came in.
That's right, two years. They had quite a
squabble. And eventually they let Morgan go. I
believe they made Morgan president and Tom became
the chancellor. Then they let Morgan go and then
Tom came back and was president. He's president
two times. And chancellor, yeah. Yeah, well, I
think it just dropped to chancellor.
Then I guess they must have established the, he got
Rutter in, and they eventually made Tom
chancellor, I guess, again. And then Rutter was
president. And then finally, they kept taking
Tom's duties away from him the first thing he knew.
He had, Rudder took it all over and became
president. That's right, he ended up in charge of
that foreign affair. Oh yeah, they just sent him on
a world tour. I remember that. That was the
kiss-off. That was his reward for retiring. I
don't know why Rudder in such a hurry only had a few
months until Harrington retired anyway. But
anyway, that's the way that turned out. Now all of
that really probably had little or no impact.
Well, it did. Actually, Rudder. That's what I'm
getting at. Rudder did more for the university, I
think, than any president we've ever had. There's
been none of them, and he's been close to where he
was. And I think that he was one of the better ones
we've ever had. Although, I didn't think he could
cut it when they put him in. Well, I know no one did,
you know. When I was doing that centennial
history, Rutter was president, and I talked to him
in the interview, and everybody I talked to said,
well, this is an unlike candidate to Virginia.
And, in fact, I used that comment in the pictorial
history or something, which I'm revising this
year. Ms. Rutter is still mad about that comment.
that he was not qualified for the job, you know, or
something like that that I made. She called me not
too long ago and told me about it. I'm just trying to
make a point that he was an unlikely man who did a
miraculous job as president. Well, you know,
people kind of felt that way. He had his training in
physical education. In the land office and
sheriff at one year or something. Then he came in
here and But he really did a tremendous job as
President, and then I was, see I was an apartment
head most of the time, but when Benson became Dean,
Barlow left. I was here when Barlow was Dean.
Barlow left and then Benson became Dean. And Dean,
he was, Dr. Lindsey worked under Benson two or
three years before I was made head. And then we
didn't go out and search. Benson just called me
over to his office one day and said... That's the
way the world works. He said, would you take the
head of the department? He said, you don't have to
answer. Right now, you can think it over a day or
two. And I thought about it a little while, and
finally decided, well, I'm interested in the work
we were doing, so I finally decided, well, I can
probably get about as much done on what I want to do
if I'm here as I could if we got somebody else in here
and had me doing what he wanted me to do. So I decided
to go ahead and take it. Then I just came very near
asking to try to get Lindsey to take it one more
year.
Good idea.
And he was, so I knew Rutter real well. When people
would come in and get the department money, he
would always go to his office. So I knew him real
well. How'd you and Vincent get along? Oh, just
fine. Well, Calhoun was dean for a little while,
not long. But Lindsey was head of the department,
and Calhoun didn't. Yeah, I would have talked to
Dr. Calhoun, but he's still in town anyway. Do you
feel like Benson, when he, one thing he did was
separate, or rather integrate, the research,
teaching, And that was about your time, wasn't it,
when you were department head? That's a hard thing
to do. And he made a good effort at it. Well, what do
you think? Well, I think it was integrated
certainly better. I worked under two different
conditions. Barlow was dean, Mellon was head of
the experiment station. And I had two bosses, and
each one of them thought And about half time on each
one, each one of them thought I was working for them
full time. Yeah, that's what happened, I know. And
so, and they didn't get along. Barlow and Mello
didn't get along. They wrote letters to one
another on the same floor. One of them had an office
on one end of that old Aerospace building and the
other one had an office on the other end. I know
that. I reported the both of them. That's where it
happened, right off. But basically though, that
system is still, that's continued. No, no,
they've changed it. Then when Benson became dean,
they put it back, put both the Experiment Station
and the academic part of it, College of
Engineering, all under one person. And that way it
can be integrated. Because he can say, well, Let's
see, if your grant's out, I guess we'd just put you
on teaching.
Provide more flexibility. Then when he, Benson,
retired, they went back to the other system and
they put Page in there. He had the academic part,
and Skip,
I mean, no, Page had the academic
part. I should know that. Yeah, Skip Porter. Yeah,
Skip Porter was the tease. That went on for two or
three years, and then they got, the next time they
put it back together, and that's the way it is right
now. I know there's always been problems. But it's
better back together. You can still run it down in
one office. Although, theoretically, the
stations isn't on the same par as a state
institution as a university. Yeah, I know it. But
it's really better run through the academic,
because you mix it up a little better. I think that
was part of the rub with Porter. Porter apparently
had connections straight to the legislature.
Well, he had all the money. Old Bates didn't have
any money. As department head, when you came in,
how would
you describe the department, and what did you
assume would be your primary effort or direction
or means? Well, first of all, we had these staff
members just before I come in, we hired two, who
were Dr. Durbin and Dr. Hupin.
And in all of those years back there, the southern
universities were always, were already behind
with research. The northern universities were
already into it. So we, I can see we had to do a lot of
catch up. And so what I tried to do was hire young
professors and bring them in as assistant
professors. And most of those people that are on
the staff now except the recent hires, I ended up
hiring them all. Including Ray, you hired Ray. I
hired Ray, I hired Darby, I hired Booker, I hired
Ackerman,
I hired Ackerman,
Hanson, Did you call
home? And
we made the reservation. Okay, good. And just to
close it, it may bother them
out there.
Is the thrust of the department changing in terms
of academics between 64 and 87? Well, I'll tell you
one of the things that I've tried to do all the time,
two or three times I've tried to do. One, I've tried
to keep, you can just go all inches on research, and
I've tried to keep those people walking that path
where you're trying to do a good job at both levels.
And we have these undergraduate students that
we've got a responsibility to do a good job with
them, and also try to build the graduate school. So
we had two responsibilities. Another thing, I've
been through all those lean years. Another thing
I've tried to do, and I think I was pretty
successful at it, because most people were on
12-month salaries. And I kept juggling around one
way or another, where everybody got to pay 12
months out of a year, and I pampered them.
Outsiders would say, well, maybe I pampered them
too much. But I tried to keep that going the whole
time. So, and also I tried to, didn't try to do
everything. Lindsey used to try to do everything
himself. Yeah, I know. He even checked the student
program of the students. He worked and did all
these kind of things. Milton used to read every
thesis and every report. Yeah, so what I did was try
to divide that up to where I could continue to do
some research. So all the time I was head of the
department I also continued to teach. I taught one
or two courses a day. And also I wrote over a hundred
technical papers and six books. I've written one
since I got through. And so I tried to stay What was
your research primarily? I did an awful lot
because I could not do much experimental research
being in an office and see. I just hit the wave of
computers. So what we were looking at was how do you
solve these simple engineering problems on
computers. So that was the type of problem we were
looking at. How did Don Harris and Ruth home
yesterday. He was showing me his new computer.
He's really loaded with some good equipment.
So this is basically what I'm trying to do. We need
to build a graduate program. We also need to keep a
good undergraduate program. I had to keep those
people trying to do a good job teaching and
research. And so that was kind of what we had to do
there, I saw. And we did fairly well at it. Those
people that have come in now, some of them didn't
fan out as well as others in the search, but a lot of
them have done real well. And I hired Olsby also.
There's another one. I hired Hall. Hall and Olsby.
You've looked up all of them. I would guess.
chemical engineering was one of the most... Dan
Benson tells me when I visit him that we were the
best department. Well, I started saying that. You
know, I really did. In the sense that, well, you
know, I knew Troy Crawford really well. As far as
mechanical and the old stable line departments,
they were here and they were good. But in terms of
expansion and being at the edge of... We tried to
keep, I tried to keep something that was going in
all these different fields. Of development. We
tried to do it with young people. I didn't. I
resisted. They were always wanting me to hire
these experts to come in, and I resisted that. You
know, that's a problem. Time and again. Time and
again, because what happens is they come in and
they get all the goodies. Yeah, that's right. And
you see these, uh... This Bokker's came in wanting
to go to work for me. And I talked with him a little
bit, and I decided, hell, let's just, uh... He
would just be overwhelming my students. I mean, my
young faculty. They just can't... He would just
try to overwhelm them to where they'd be nothing.
The big department can tolerate it, but we can't.
That's really a problem, and you see a lot of these
guys being brought in, especially in the last,
what, 10 or 15 years, distinguished whatever they
are, and they come in and they don't do anything.
Yeah, they want to buy everything. And I thought,
what's the real measure of accomplishments is to
hire a young man and then have him make a
contribution. Make him have, then let him have
contributions. And so if you can hire the young
people, bring them in. And also, you've got a
pretty good chance, because they're hungry.
That's right. No question about it. And so bring
the young people in and let them do it. Now, again,
between 64 and 87, roughly right now, Was there a,
how about your students? What kind of students are
you getting and how would you describe them? Where
are they going after they get out of here? Oh you
know it, well they've always, generally the only
year we didn't have jobs was because
that's when we had the biggest glass thing
somewhere along there. It was hard for me to say,
you know, We've had good students. I'll tell you
the best students that I think I've ever ran across
were, don't know that they were the smartest, but
it was the World War II veterans that came back
here. And it wasn't because they were necessarily
any smarter. All they wanted to know was just what
is required. Or they'd go after it. And they'd do it
really first class. And I think... there's an
indication that students are not working as hard
they're well prepared maybe they are i don't know
um i know they're not as good as attending classes
no they sure not i remain i see that yeah in my class
and uh i just kind of feel like well if you it's your
business you're paying the money if you don't come
in here and get it i'm not going to force you to yeah
But as far as being prepared, they're well
prepared. In fact, this would be hard to see for us
to some extent because we get better students out
of high school. Yeah, that's true, too. If you get
smart students, it's hard to screw them up.
They're going to be good. In spite of all the
teaching that you do, they're still going to be
smart students in the end. They're about as sharp
as they ever were. They're sharp as they ever were.
And they have had more, probably better
preparation. The thing is, I don't think they work
as hard as they tend to. And I don't think they're as
thorough, won't be as thorough as they used to be.
But they're sharp. Don or Bill Harris, one of them,
was talking about the change that they have seen in
that there's less hands-on engineering involved
in construction and this kind of thing. Do you see
that? Or is that even a... I'm sure there is from the
old days. Well, actually, what's happening is
that nobody's got much hands on anymore in the
plants. Even when you're out there, yeah. Yeah,
because it's all done in a control room where it
needs to go out there and be changed valves. Well,
that's probably what they were talking about. But
now you turn the valve, you push the buttons, and
you let the computer up, and you don't understand
what you're doing. I don't know if that was Donald
or Bill or one of them. But they still have to go out
there and look at what's out there. And I don't know
if there's really that much difference, because
see, they never could do too much, because the
union people were the only ones that could turn
down anything, unless you had a strike. And so, I
don't know if there's that much. There's a lot of
difference. The big difference in industry now is
they're pulling off a lot of the technical work
that used to be done. It's not being done inside the
industry anymore. They're contracting. They're
contracting all their design work. They don't
even have design forces. They've slimmed down to
where the people working for them just kind of
manage projects. They don't actually do the
detailed design. They've got a few people around,
but engineering firms are picking that up. Do you
see more of your STEM-E graduates going into that
kind of work? I'm not really sure because I'm not
following employment right now. Well, there's a
lot more changing now. I imagine there's a lot more
changing around. But I don't think all this
downsizing has been good. What's happened is that
you can get into a situation and just keep cutting
down and keep cutting down. I saw an article in the
Post the other day. One of the stock brokers had
come out and said that initially they were vapor.
companies and help rate if they downsized. He said
that was no longer. They had decided that they'd
done already too much of that, and then he told,
this was editorial, and then the guy told the story
about the Scotsman with the horse, and he found out
that, decided, well, I'm just beating this horse,
I'm just better speed with it, so he cut it. Then he
said, well, he seems to be getting along with that
all right. So he cut it again, and he kept cutting
and he kept cutting. Finally, he wasn't feeding no
horse anything. He died. So that's just the moral
of it. You can overdo it. But this is payout. The
industries do go for payout. Yeah, and they seem to
be pushed heavily by the financial community.
They're pushed by them, and also they're pushed by
others. If others start doing it, they start doing
it. I never did understand that until I was talking
to a fellow one day, and he pointed out to me, the
petroleum company, production people were
particularly bad about that. One of them started
drilling over here, all of them. All of them
running over there trying to get a lease, you know,
at the same time. And he said, well, just think of
yourself as a plantation board of directors. He
said, you know the competition's running out
doing this. And you chose not to go in that
direction. Then it turns out that what they did was
real successful and what you did failed. What do
you think your board's going to say? You dumbass.
Watch those people over there. You mean you
couldn't see where they were going? That's the
same with mergers and... all this kind of thing.
But I think it's readjusting, and they're going
more toward a team effort. Trying to go toward a
team effort now, maybe this thing, but I think
there's a lot of tendency toward cutting back on
friends' benefits. One of the things that I'm
afraid of is The same way with the universities.
Once you get management too much in control, they
tend to start trying to in effect the amounts of
this running over the people. The same thing with
the universities now, getting this going to
revoke tenure. See, I was with this, I helped get in
this. Tenure system? Well, not the tenure system
as much as that grading system for students. I
remember very well old Samson worked it out, and I
supported him on it because I felt like everybody
was just swearing and declaring this will never be
used for salaries. I had some of these old guys
around here say, I'm against that. The
administration will be using that for salaries.
No, no, they said they wouldn't. You know, they'll
keep their word. And you see what's happened.
That's right. Yeah, well, it's come from that.
Because if they'd have kept it like it was
initially, it would have been all right, just for
the profit of the city. Yeah. But there's too much
resistance there to use it. So that's a weakness
of it. When you retired in 1987, did you go
consulting? No, I set up this institute. And I
still teach one course, but I run this institute
that's a non-profit charitable corporation. I'm
president of it. It operates just like the
Research Foundation. We are not part of the
university. Do you have some literature or
brochure? Let me carry some of that away with me.
I'll give you a whole packet of it. And so that's
what we're getting out now, another mailing. So
what I've done is looked at chemicals, cancer,
safety in the workplace, hazardous waste
incineration, chlorine. Speaking of that, Don
Harris again was talking about his son, his son
named William Sawyer. Yeah, he studied. Well, I
think that's a... I don't think so at all. I think
that... Well, I don't think so. No, I think that
they both had the same kind of cancer. I think
that's an inheritance.
I think that was an inheritance. But actually we
found that the industry had about 9% fewer lower
cancer rates than the general public. We had this
study done outside the university with an
epidemiologist. with the Texas School of Public
Health. And it turned out that they were 9% less,
most of them were less statistically
significant. Any of those that were elevated,
none of them were statistically significant. So,
and these were the people that were exposed more
heavier than Don's son. They were the ones that
were exposed. Back there, starting in the 30s,
40s, and 50s, when there was no limitation on
anything, the smoke was just billowing out of
those tanks. And everybody looked on that as a sign
of production, so they were full steam ahead.
Well, that's good. That's a good thing. And then we
did one on chlorine after that. The Texas chemical
industry out here in the future is one we've done
now. And we're doing two right at this time. One of
them is on hormesis. We've hired that one done, but
it's a property of a chemical to be toxic to high
doses and therapeutic to low. And you see all
medicines... Like snake poison or something.
Well, all medicines are... Yeah, they are. That's
right. And so there's no reason to suspect other
chemists don't have. So what I'm going to do is see
how widespread this is. Good. Now you can do this
stuff. And then I'm doing more. Who are you going
to? May I ask? Most of the food and drug
administration? Oh, you mean... Oh, it was made
mostly for the companies. By the companies?
Uh-huh. They got a membership fee. We got about 80
to 70 or 80 members. And then I go out and speak to, I
speak to Rotary Clubs and Lions Clubs. I've spoken
about once or twice a week to all of them, to the
Rotary Clubs down in the Houston area. Well,
that's great. That's exciting. That's a good
thing to be doing. So, right now, we're getting out
two or three mailings. One of them is the
proceedings last spring at the annual meeting,
which was on this topic of Hermesius. We're
getting out. a review of, I'll give you a copy.
Yeah, if you will. I did a little review on
background on it, just an introduction to it, and I
spoke for about 22 o'clock that night the other day
on that, just in the form of my sending it out to some
select members of the Institute. Then I had the
review here not long ago, this book, Our Stolen
Future, It's a book that's come out that, well,
they're, what, basically... Pollution
environment? Yeah, well, see, they start out with
heavy doses have done all this damage to them,
wildlife and so on. Yeah. Therefore, jump all the
way over to the low-dose exposures is harmful.
Well, we don't really know what that is. But they
presented this back, and it's the way it's written
up. So you want to abolish this one? And so what I'm
doing at this point, yeah, and so it's just that we
ought to do more testing to find out exactly where
we are. So that was it. I'll tell you what, we
probably did well running over there. All right.
Great.